GemmaAgent is a small language model written in Rust.

Rust is a systems programming language focused on safety, speed, and reliability.
Rust provides ownership, borrowing, lifetimes, traits, enums, pattern matching, and zero-cost abstractions.

A language model learns patterns from text.
During training, the model receives a sequence of tokens and tries to predict the next token.
The difference between the predicted token and the correct token is measured by cross entropy loss.
Gradients are computed with automatic differentiation.
AdamW updates the model parameters using the computed gradients.

GemmaAgent uses a transformer architecture.
The transformer contains token embeddings, causal self-attention, feed-forward layers, and an output projection.
Causal attention prevents a token from attending to future tokens.
Multi-head attention allows the model to learn different relationships between tokens.

During inference, GemmaAgent can generate text one token at a time.
KV cache stores previously computed keys and values so that they do not need to be recomputed for every generated token.
This makes incremental decoding faster than repeatedly evaluating the entire sequence.

Greedy decoding selects the most probable next token.
Temperature changes the sharpness of the probability distribution.
Top-k sampling restricts sampling to the k most probable tokens.

Example Rust code:

fn main() {
    println!("Hello from GemmaAgent!");
}

Rust programs are compiled before execution.
Cargo is the Rust package manager and build system.
A Rust project normally contains a Cargo.toml file and a src directory.

Machine learning experiments should be reproducible.
Training checkpoints should be saved periodically.
A checkpoint allows training to continue after an interruption or system failure.

GemmaAgent is designed as an educational language model.
The current tokenizer is byte-level.
Future versions can use BPE or another subword tokenizer with a larger vocabulary.
Future improvements can also include RMSNorm, RoPE, SIMD optimizations, contiguous tensor backends, and GPU acceleration.

The goal is to build a small language model from first principles in Rust.
The project includes training, inference, checkpointing, benchmarking, testing, and continuous integration.

Rust makes it possible to build fast and memory-efficient machine learning software.
A carefully designed runtime can execute transformer inference directly on the CPU.
Efficient memory access and cache-friendly tensor operations are important for good inference performance.

The model should learn simple facts about programming, machine learning, transformers, Rust, and GemmaAgent.
Training data should contain many natural examples rather than a single repeated sentence.

Rust ownership example:

struct User {
    name: String,
    age: u32,
}

fn greet(user: &User) {
    println!("Hello, {}!", user.name);
}

fn main() {
    let user = User {
        name: String::from("Alice"),
        age: 20,
    };

    greet(&user);
}

Attention example:

Given a sequence of tokens, the model creates queries, keys, and values.
Attention scores are computed from queries and keys.
A causal mask prevents access to future positions.
The scores are normalized with softmax.
The resulting weights are multiplied by the values.

A transformer language model predicts:
"The Rust language is"
and may continue with:
"fast, safe, and expressive."

Good training data should include different sentence lengths, punctuation, code, explanations, and repeated concepts expressed in different ways.

GemmaAgent training is an experiment in understanding how modern language models work.
