GemmaAgent is a small decoder-only language model written in Rust.
This file is a sample training corpus. It is designed for testing the training pipeline, not for producing a capable general-purpose model.

A language model learns statistical patterns from sequences of tokens.
During causal language modeling, the model receives tokens from the past and predicts the next token.
For the sentence "Rust is fast", a training example can use "Rust is" as input and "is fast" as the shifted target.
The training objective is commonly cross entropy loss.

Tokenization converts text into token IDs.
An embedding table converts token IDs into dense vectors.
A transformer processes those vectors through repeated decoder blocks.
A decoder block can contain RMSNorm, causal self-attention, a feed-forward network, and residual connections.

Causal attention prevents a position from using information from future positions.
Suppose the sequence contains five tokens.
At position zero the model can see only position zero.
At position two the model can use positions zero, one, and two.
At position four the model can use all positions from zero through four.
This property makes next-token prediction consistent with autoregressive generation.

Multi-head attention uses queries, keys, and values.
Attention scores measure how strongly each query should use each key.
Softmax converts scores into normalized weights.
The weighted values form the attention output.
Different heads can learn different relationships in the sequence.

RoPE, or rotary positional embedding, injects position information into query and key representations.
RMSNorm normalizes hidden states using their root mean square.
SwiGLU is a gated feed-forward architecture that combines a learned gate with a nonlinear transformation.
Residual connections help information flow across deep transformer networks.

The training loop has several important stages.
First, read a corpus.
Second, tokenize the corpus.
Third, select training windows.
Fourth, run the forward pass.
Fifth, compute cross entropy.
Sixth, calculate gradients with backpropagation.
Seventh, clip gradients when required.
Eighth, update parameters with AdamW.
Finally, record the loss and periodically evaluate the validation set.

A validation set must not be used for parameter updates.
Training loss measures how well the model fits the training examples.
Validation loss measures performance on held-out examples.
If training loss decreases while validation loss increases, overfitting may be occurring.
Perplexity is the exponential of the average negative log likelihood.

AdamW is an optimizer frequently used for transformer models.
Learning rate controls the size of parameter updates.
Warmup gradually increases the learning rate at the beginning of training.
Cosine decay can reduce the learning rate later in training.
Gradient clipping limits unusually large gradients and can improve numerical stability.
Gradient accumulation allows multiple small micro-batches to contribute to one optimizer update.

Checkpoints are important for long training runs.
A checkpoint can contain model weights, optimizer state, update number, and random state.
Saving the best validation checkpoint is useful because the last training update is not necessarily the best model.

Rust provides ownership, borrowing, lifetimes, traits, enums, pattern matching, and strong compile-time checks.
Cargo is the standard Rust package manager and build system.
A basic Rust program looks like this:

fn main() {
    println!("Hello from GemmaAgent");
}

A Rust function example:

fn square(x: i32) -> i32 {
    x * x
}

fn main() {
    let value = square(7);
    println!("{}", value);
}

Rust's Result type represents success or failure.
Rust's Option type represents the presence or absence of a value.
The question mark operator can propagate errors from functions that return Result.

Example error handling:

use std::fs;

fn load_text(path: &str) -> Result<String, std::io::Error> {
    let text = fs::read_to_string(path)?;
    Ok(text)
}

Machine learning data should be clean and diverse.
Repeated copies of one paragraph teach the model mostly that paragraph.
A useful corpus should contain many topics, sentence lengths, writing styles, examples, questions, explanations, and code samples.
Training data should not contain passwords, API keys, private keys, or other confidential information.

Question: What is tokenization?
Answer: Tokenization converts text into discrete token IDs that can be processed by a neural network.

Question: What is an embedding?
Answer: An embedding maps a token ID to a learned dense vector.

Question: What is causal attention?
Answer: Causal attention prevents a token position from attending to future positions.

Question: Why is validation useful?
Answer: Validation helps measure generalization and detect overfitting.

Question: Why save checkpoints?
Answer: Checkpoints allow training to resume after interruption and preserve useful model states.

Question: What does AdamW do?
Answer: AdamW updates model parameters using gradients together with adaptive moments and decoupled weight decay.

Question: What is perplexity?
Answer: Perplexity is the exponential of the average negative log likelihood.

Question: What is a logit?
Answer: A logit is an unnormalized score assigned to a possible next token.

Question: What does softmax do?
Answer: Softmax converts a vector of scores into probabilities that sum to one.

Question: Why is gradient accumulation useful?
Answer: It increases the effective batch size without requiring the complete batch to fit in GPU memory at once.

GPU acceleration can improve training speed when tensor operations are large enough and the backend is efficient.
AMD GPUs on Linux can use supported Vulkan compute paths.
Actual performance depends on the GPU, driver, backend, model size, tensor shapes, and memory bandwidth.
A benchmark on the target machine is more reliable than a theoretical speed estimate.

A small model should be tested before a larger model.
Short context and a tiny corpus make debugging faster.
After the forward pass and gradients are verified, context length, hidden size, layer count, and dataset size can be increased.
Correctness should be established before aggressive optimization.

If loss becomes NaN, inspect the learning rate, input values, gradient norms, normalization, attention scores, and floating-point ranges.
If loss remains high, check tokenization, targets, shifting, masking, model capacity, learning rate, and dataset quality.
A model cannot learn useful general knowledge from a tiny repetitive corpus, even when the training implementation is correct.

Example text continuation:
Rust is a systems programming language.
Rust focuses on safety and performance.
Cargo builds Rust packages.
Transformers process token sequences.
Attention connects information across positions.
A language model predicts the next token.

Example arithmetic facts:
Two plus two equals four.
Three times four equals twelve.
Ten minus three equals seven.
Eight divided by two equals four.

Example reasoning:
If a box contains five red balls and three blue balls, the total number of balls is eight.
If two balls are removed, six balls remain.

Example science facts:
Water freezes at 0 degrees Celsius at standard atmospheric pressure.
Earth orbits the Sun.
The Moon orbits Earth.
Plants use light energy during photosynthesis.

Example geography facts:
A map represents locations and relationships between places.
A continent contains many countries and regions.
Latitude measures angular distance north or south of the equator.
Longitude measures angular distance east or west of a reference meridian.

Good training examples should express concepts in multiple forms.
The same idea can appear as a definition, a question and answer, a paragraph, an example, or a short explanation.
This variety helps the model learn language patterns rather than memorizing one exact template.

The purpose of this file is to verify that GemmaAgent can read a UTF-8 corpus, tokenize it, create causal next-token targets, compute loss, backpropagate gradients, update parameters, evaluate validation data, and save checkpoints.
For serious training, replace this sample with a much larger high-quality corpus appropriate for the desired language and domain.
